Okay, you were giving impressions of Dr. Calhoun.
My relationship with him started in the early 60s.
The Department of Commerce, the U.S. Department
of Commerce, started what they called an Office of
Technical Services, MTS. And what they would do is
they would provide you funding to answer
inquiries from industry in your state. So Dr.
Calhoun created, at that time, what he called the
State Technical Services Institute. He asked me
to serve as director of that, which I did. And so I
had some connection with them. But the real
connection, I guess, come was when the Sea Grant
program got done. I had quite a hunk of that Sea
Grant program at one time. And that come down there
in the late 60s as well. So I remember it had to be
before 73. And I did a lot of work with the Sea Grant
program.
because I used my industrial economics staff.
It's been perfect to do all the economic studies
along the coast and things of that nature. And OTS
had gone out of business, by the way.
Off-technical service had gone out of business.
And then I got in on the Sea Grant program. And of
course, we run all those things. So that's really
the period between 65 and 73 is when I got well
acquired. Make believe that I had never seen John
Calhoun described him physically and his style. I
wish I had a picture. I could just give it to you. Dr.
Calhoun was probably
the best, the most diversified, intelligent
individual that I have ever met in my life. Dr.
Calhoun could grasp things rapidly. I don't know
whether he did a lot of reading on these things
before I come in contact with him or not, but he was
always very well versed.
My experience with him was through the State
Technical Institute and through the Sea Grant
Program. And I always felt that Dr. Calhoun was a
very easy person to talk to. I never have seen Dr.
Now, some people have told me they've seen Dr.
Calhoun mad. I've never seen him mad. Never had in
my life.
But we've become pretty close, I do in those years,
on different things. We attended a lot of
conferences together. I did a lot of studies. And
then one day out of the clear blue sky in 1973, on a
Thursday afternoon, I was working away, and I got
this phone call. It was Dr. Whitman. And Dr.
Williams said, you know, now, I believe I told you
before, I was having my industrial conference
start Monday. And I had the governor coming over to
get the welcome address, which I had every year.
And Dr. Williams said, Jim, I'd like to talk to you
in just a few minutes. And he did, and that's when I
got to work. He said, fine. I went on down to his
office. And after about five minutes of shaking
hands and things, he said, you know, we have a
vacancy as director of the Indian State Service.
that we want to create in the Office of Continuing
Education. And he says, I'd like for you to get
those done. Now, tell me about this man, Jack
Williams. Well, of course, Jack Williams and Dr.
Calhoun were very close. I mean, business-wise, I
don't know about political-wise, but they were
always there. They had a lot of respect for each
other. So I said, well, Dr. Williams, I didn't even
know there was a place. I had the job, but I really
enjoyed it. getting bigger every day and getting
more statewide and that's the recognition i said i
i'd have to think about a little bit he said well
what do you do you need anything to think about i
said yes i said i want to copy the budget i said i want
to see what kind of budget they have where their
sources of money is coming from so he got on the
phone and he called fred benson if i'm not mistaken
it might have been calvin but he called somebody
and told me he had been dragged into the office, and
he said, I'd like to get you a bunch of stuff here for
the internet attention service. And so he got them
out about half a week. And so we just did a few
minutes, and he said,
well, when do you think we can get back together?
And I said, we'll get back here on Monday morning. I
said, I have all Saturday and Sunday. We'll get
back Monday morning. So he said, well, just give me
a ring Monday morning when you're ready. And I did.
Somewhere you just can't do without it. And I
didn't get to until, we couldn't get together
until about 3 o'clock that afternoon. But I went
there and I told him what my problem was. And I had,
you know, because I didn't do anything. I said, you
know, if I'm going to do this, I need this, I need
this, I need this, I need this, I need this, this,
this. Got down to the bottom line. The most
important thing, I had to have total control of all
the people in the organization. And that I was
going to be fair with them. I was going to evaluate
each one of them. But if they didn't fit into the
organization, if I'm going to plan for this, then
we're going to have to find somebody that will fill
that spot. But anyway, it went on like that. And I
had to listen pretty long. When I got through, he
says, is that all? I said, yes, sir. He said, you
haven't asked for nothing. He said, you haven't
asked for nothing? He said, no. I think he said, you
haven't asked for nothing. You can't get it. And so
I said, OK. So then he called Fred Benson in
California. I told him that I'd accepted the job.
And I guess Calhoun could tell you more about it
from now on. As far as you know, he had talked with
each of them in depth. Oh, yes. Oh, I'm quite sure of
that. I mean, Dr. Williams would have done... No,
and another thing I had, see, I had a lot of research
projects in that industry, industrial economics
research, and this was in August when he called me
in. And I told him, I said, I couldn't possibly
accept the job until December 12th. Really?
Because I had sponsors out here that supported me
for years. And I said, well, that'd be fun. That
didn't bother any. Describe the extension
service when you took over. What was it? How big was
it? Where was it? Well, it was in the old American
Legion Hall, where Bob White walked before he
moved out there. That used to be just an old
building there. Do you remember that? Or was it
already down when you got here? I don't know. it i
was here do you remember where the headquarters of
bob white's wasn't until just about a year ago no no
well you know where the uh you know where the farmer
student association building is now it used to be
that old wooden building right across the street
oh across the street yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
over there by the police station yeah yeah well i
didn't know anybody I didn't know anybody in
Indian Peninsula except Ernie Winochek. The only
reason I knew him, he had . And I had met him through
Buddy Williams. And Buddy Williams, he and Ernie
were pretty good friends. But he's the only one I
knew. And so when I took over, they took action at
the October 4th meeting. Ford Hall made the
motion, Ms. Wilson seconded it. This is 73? 73. No,
70. Yes, 73. I forgot to go with you. 71st, 73. But
this meeting was in October before the meeting.
And so when that was announced, it would come out in
the paper and everything by the day. Well, by the
way, Dr. Knight, you know, the dean of medicine,
was approved the same day I was approved to direct
the Institute of Patient Service. His picture's
on the front page of the Eagle on one side and mine's
on the other. And I just saw when they fixed that
monument or whatever it was. But... When I went
over to the Engineering Extension Service, it had
a budget of about $1.5 million, and they had about
$50 million employed.
Where were they based? All of them here? Yeah, at
that time. They were a very...
They weren't up to date. There was not an area that
you could find that they don't. They taught
without lesson plans. They didn't have any
technical manuals.
It's a training organization. But they have 51
employees and a little over about a million and a
half dollars budget. But their budget comes,
one-third comes from Texas Education Agency,
one-third comes directly from Appropriations,
and then they've got one-third of their budget
from the city. And that was the third, third, and
third. Well, you've got to realize, the
engineering attention service was an
overarching section. And most of the employees
were in there since their first job. Anyway, when
it was announced, they had a Dr. Mansfield, who was
the associate director. And that was the final
person that you ever want to meet. But he had been
led to believe, either through himself or through
Mr. Bearden. See, Mr. Bearden had been director,
and he retired. That he was going to be the
director. Well, by the way, when I become
director, well, I'll be the director. But anyway,
and all of them in the engineering and attention
service was, you know, shocked that he didn't get
it. So the first day I took over, December 1, 1973, I
stayed away from it until I My wife went in for her
third malignancy surgery. She was operating from
that morning, the first day I had to go. Two
important events. Very important events. I
stayed with my wife. I called Dr. Calhoun, which I
don't know who I called. I don't know who I called.
But anyway, they knew where I was at. And I stayed
with her all that day. We were talking to Quade. And
we had a doctor out of Houston come up. And that was
her third
surgery. So after they got through with the
surgery, it was in about five hours, Dr. Quaid come
out and told me, he said, I don't have much hope for
you. He said, but we're going to send her down to
Houston and start taking chemotherapy. No, I'm
not going to dwell on this. Anyway, after the third
operation, my wife had about all the operations
she wanted. But anyway, they made an appointment
for me to go see this doctor down at the hospital in
Houston. And I got away at the point. It was 1.30 in
the afternoon. My wife and I walked in, and I
checked in, and he shut the door, and I stayed
outside. And about 20 minutes, or 15 minutes, he'd
come out and said, I'm sorry. I said, your wife
won't let me touch you. He said, she's not going to
take you from up there. I said, And he said, unless I
get to examine it. So we went in and he said, come on
in. I said, are you sure you made up the money? I
said, how much did I owe him? He said, $35. I wrote
him a check. And that was in 1973. Can you imagine
that? But going back to where did primarily
geographically, where did When you took over,
where were they doing the instruction that they
were? They were going out in motels. No, but where
was it? Was it in the Houston area? Oh, it was all
over the state. But it wasn't concentrated in one?
No, no. OK. No, no. See, they were doing all the
training for rural electric co-ops, and their
linemen training and things of this nature. They
did a lot of training for the Texas Telephone
Association. But see, they were getting
subsidized.
Right. Give more examples of that. Okay, and the
law enforcement, all the state and law
enforcement, water and wastewater, they did all
the training for water and wastewater in the
cities. Of course, we had the fire protection, we
had the extension part of it, and then we had the
fire field. Fireman Training Center was all part
of that? Oh, yeah. That was it. That was the biggest
part. But they used volunteer instructors. They
only had four people on the full-time staff of the
farm. They'd go to town, they'd just get somebody
on the farm to volunteer. Was there one client that
was by far the key one, the biggest? Well, the rural
electric co-op, of course, the organization was
so small, they only had 50, 55 people. But the rural
electric co-ops, and the tucson telephone
association and the water departments of the
cities and the law enforcement and the law those
were your it was all sizable but but to kind of put
this thing in perspective when i left there we had
400 employees in a 39 million dollar budget was
only getting 3 million in general revenue 36
million was coming in fees and contracts now wait
what give me those numbers again When I took over,
it was around 51, I think, employees, about 1.5
million. When I left on December, I mean on January
the 31st, 1992, we had a $39 million budget we had
for employees. And of that budget, how much did
y'all... Ten percent. We got three million and
something in general revenue. The rest you
brought in. Just as in fees and contracts. All
right. When you started out, you were primarily
serving small-town needs... rural areas, and
city water departments in your small town, city
water departments, small town lawns. And the
telephone companies were the co-ops. All right,
let's see. When you took over, were there any key
office staff members that you came to rely on? I'm
talking about the people in the office. I lined
them up real fast. I had to bring them in. As I told
you, Dr. Mansfield was a fine person, and there
must have been a shock to his system because he had
never heard of me. And, of course, he just never
would. Well, he had a different philosophy. His
philosophy and my philosophy was completely 100%
different. I was used to the soft money operation.
I've always had the soft money operation. I liked
it. It gave me a lot of latitude. They didn't like
it. It was a threat to their jobs. Scared them.
Threatened their jobs. So, but then another thing
I asked Dr. Williams when I took over, I had to have a
new headquarters office. I had to have another
office in England. I never did go down to that one,
but I was up on the eighth floor at the top, because
that's where I had the Director of Continuing
Education, and I had that whole eighth floor at the
top. Of the Rudder Tower? Yeah. So, that's where,
that was my headquarters for both Austin
Continuing Education and Continuing Education.
All right, when you took over, in terms of
reporting you reported to dr calhoun and fred in
which order all three of us worked very well all
right on paper was it to benson or was it to both on
paper okay uh see i got funding from junior
education texas university All right, let's go
back and talk about this man, Benson. He's a
Kansan, I think, didn't he come? Kent State. And
tell me about his working style and so forth. Well,
you never did leave a meeting with Fred Benson that
you didn't know where he stood. He wasn't a bit
bashful to pick up the phone and say, Jim, what's
this I hear about so-and-so's? It explained it to
him. That was the end of it, I guess, for me at all.
You know, we had our ground rules. I set my ground
rules with him. What do you expect? What kind of
report do you want? When do you want me to inform you
of something? Give me some guidelines. Because I
don't have time to tell you everything I do. And you
don't have time to listen to everything I do. Give
me your guidelines. You know what Mr. Benson's
answer was to that? keep me informed on the matter
you think that I could have some input on. I never
called them. Not that, you know, I just, I just
never had a reason. I can say the same thing about
California. All right, now, officially, the
Extension, the Extension, Engineering
Extension Service was part of the Texas A&M
University and of the system. No, the Engineering
Extension Service was always a part of the system
all right during those years with Williams and
Calhoun and Benson did it matter system or campus
and how you operated when
you wanted to communicate with them whom did you
have to go through to get to Calhoun or to Benson?
Nobody except their secretary. They all, you
always, he had the same, they had the same thing
with me. I mean, we never, I never had one minute
that I ever thought. All right, as you think back on
those first years, what were some key decisions
that were made by you or anybody else? Retain to the
system. or pertaining to the work of the of the
extension of the extension of the well
I'm not being derogatory but I had to have people
that would grow I had you know I had maybe two people
with college degrees Dr. Mansfield might have had
one or two others the rest of them was all
non-degree people they had one title it was all
called instructors
so my first thing that I did when I went in there by
January the 1st I had a I had a study conducted on
what their title should be I had told me exactly
what the qualification should be as far as
education experience and I even I had no pay range
everybody made the same if you're an instructor
you make the same or give or take So the first thing
we did, we give them something to, and then in
February of that year, I had a meeting in Wyandale
with the whole staff. Day and a half, two days of
meetings. At which time, I give them a copy of what I
call management by objective. How we was gonna run
the engineering services, what part they was
gonna play, what was expected of them, and so forth
and so on. And that didn't go too well then. But
anyway, there was a few, You know, they really
didn't touch it. But you've got to remember, this
was an old organization. They'd all been in
together. Here's a damn stranger. But anyway,
after we had that meeting, and none of them
understood management at all. They didn't know
what management by objective was. They didn't,
you know, it had never been as fun. But anyway, when
we started putting that thing together, and then
on June the 1st, I come into a recommendation with
Dr. Williams, This is for the engineer detention
services. Recommendation of Dr. Williams to Fred
Benson. I kept Fred informed on it. He told me to
take it to Dr. Williams. On the pay scale. And they
had about, I'd say they had about $500,000 in the
services. Engineer detention services had about
$500,000. So we automatically, if they had the
qualifications, they could go into this pay
status. If they didn't, to find somebody that had
those qualifications and so forth and so on. But
we'd give them each title, training specialist,
associate training specialist, assistant
training specialist, you know, give them to
separate them. But, what was the question? Well,
it was about key decisions. Okay. That's how the
decisions were made. And then once we got that
thing in line, and unfortunately, the borough got
them plans, you know, Decided to take
retirement. He was about six or seven years old.
And he decided to take retirement. And he took
retirement. Three days later, he died. He died of a
heart attack. But he'd had bypass surgery. So that
moved that phase, whatever you want to call it,
out. And then I brought in a new man as associate
director. I brought in Neil Pratt right off. He was
a young engineer. How do you spell his last name? He
was a young man. He was with TTI. And how did he come
about being with us? TTI was getting into public
works training. Well, I had created a center for
public works. And I picked up the paper one
Saturday morning. There was TTI announcing their
public works. So I got a hold of Fred. I said, Fred,
we've got a problem. He said, what's the problem? I
told him. He said, I'll take care of that Monday
morning. So he had Jack Keese in. And all of a
sudden, he could get out of public work. That's an
extension activity. That's not a research
activity. And so Milton Rutte was in that position
for TPI. So I just transferred him and one other TPI
staff member. Their whole people worked in public
work. And it turned out that Milton was a very good
engineer, and a very smart individual, and a very,
very good driver. Hard work, very hard work. So I
brought him over to the social director. Well,
that made all the rest of the, well, I didn't do it by
all. He's there a year, a year and a half. So I
brought him, you know, I observed him for a time.
But that's how that got started. But when you have
to have a decision made, it took me less than five
minutes to get it. I could call Benson. He'd say,
well, what did you do? Or what do you want to do? Or I
could call Calhoun. Calhoun wasn't as quick on the
draw as Benson was, but he was still very quick. You
know what I mean? Did
you ever get the impression that either one of them
ever made a snap judgment without thinking it
through?
Let's see, back to other decisions. Because
you're in charge for 19 years. 73 to 92. Other
decisions that you now look back on and say, those
were key decisions we made. Well, one key decision
we made happened. You always build on your
strength. We had a reputation in the fire
department, all over the state. I could contact
every legislator with one phone call. So I said,
that's our fight. So the first thing I did, I put
about $150,000 in the FARC. I said, look, we don't
have any roads in here. We don't have any training
aids out there or exhibits. So I put that right on.
And that was located then where it is now, just east
of Easterwood Airport. Right. And Calhoun was
responsible for getting that location along the
four optical vision attention center. But
anyway. So we started building on that. Then I
said, okay, what's your second strength? Well, my
second strength was electronics, but I had a man in
electronics that, you know, had no education to
speak of. So his name was Art. A fine person. All
these people out in town, you know, fine people,
and that wasn't the problem with them was that they
didn't have the background to do what was
necessary. So I replaced him right off with Dr.
Lloyd Fite. F-I-T-E. F-I-T-E. He was Dick
Renardi's... Andy, man, you knew me, you know?
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. So, Dick would already call me up
one day. He said, Jim, he said, Lloyd didn't get his
tenure. And he said, you know, he said, do you want
to get out of the academic park or whatever? And he
said, is there any way you can take him half-time? I
said, sure, I can take him half-time. Well, I took
Lloyd over and it was half-time with other
spending. That was in February. It was half-time
September 1st. He'd go on a phone call. We had it out
to read with the nurse. And so we then started
leaning pretty heavy on electronics, and we got
that thing built up. We had a gentleman in me in the
rural electric co-ops. At one time, the same
gentleman was over at the rural electric co-op
training and the Texas Telephone Association
training. So when he retired, I saw that was my
strength coming. In the meantime, I got to be very,
very well informed and acquainted with folks with
people on the Texas, Texas Temporal Association
Board, and the Electric Fire Department Board.
And they were lobbying for me. The Rural Electric
Corps would take the engineering and maintenance
service with their lobbyists for funding. And
same thing with Texas Temporal Association. So I
said, well, you know, that's a growth area. Maybe
not Rural Electric, but, you know, we've got
others. So we started tying in there with GTE.
Started tying in with several others. Got all
their training materials. They'd give me every
bit of their training material. We could use,
reproduce. But at that time, see, none of my people
had nothing, no training material. So we got that
from the telephone train, from the telephone.
Then we started getting the power train, electric
power. The real electric co-op didn't have any,
but Houston Light and Power at that time had
plenty. Texas, the big one that really helped me
out on my electric training was Texas Fire and
Light. It's now Texas Utility. That's how we built
the thing. We took those growth areas. And then
after, you know, we evaluated them, and if they had
no growth potential, you know, you say, you know,
we maybe ought to take them out, which we did. We did
away with three or four divisions. What were they?
Oh, boy.
They were always one-man operations.
We had, well, one thing we did, Fire had to have this
material, and I took that directly away from fire.
I started to have this training, a whole division
of it. But Al Sterling, a very fine guy, he was a
Coast Guard colonel, retired. He had his master's
degree from MIT. When he retired, we brought him up
here with both divisions and also put that under
fire. We did the same thing with management
training. We used to have two levels of management
training. One was for the very bold level
training. So then we just started to get to the
higher level, the supervisory training. So I let
that lower division just go and just started what I
call supervisory training. And I'm sure there's
five or six others, but I didn't write all of them.
But we ended up, we started out, we had five
divisions, and we ended up with 17 divisions.
Our staff, the professionals first is the support
staff, and we're about four to one. Every
professional has about one. See, now that staff
person had to do a lot of work while those people
were traveling all over the state of Texas. And
they had to have strong staff people. But it was
about four to one. Where, in the areas where you all
worked, in what area, what work area, subject
area, was it easiest to raise money, and which one
was most difficult to support? It was all, there
was no difference. Let me just tell you why. We
started centers about 10 years after I got there,
about in 78, 79. I put in my first center in San
Antonio called South Central Texas Regional
Training Center. And at that time, Henry Cisneros
was on the city council, and then Lenny made the
marriage. And they had a program over there that
was under the junior college, and they were
totally unhappy. The city funded it, and they were
totally unhappy So the guy, the president of
Central Junior College over there, Mr. Dr.
Whelan, so they asked me to take it over. I said,
well, listen, we've got as much as we want. I'll go
talk to him. Well, I'll go talk to him. He was as
happy as a lark to get it to me. You can't get along
with him. But anyway, he had about a $300,000 a year
program with him. And so then when we took over
South Central Region Training Center, whenever I
did anything like that, I'll give everyone what
they need. You've got to provide me facilities.
Mm-hmm. And you know what I mean? We can't rent
them. We don't mean that. We mean we want
facilities built. If you want the engineering
facility to come in, we have to look the part and
play the part. And so we've got real nice
facilities. The city got it with EDA grant. And the
man in San Antonio gives 20 acres of land. But
anyway, we turned out to have a big thing. So then
when they redid the hemisphere area, They wanted
us to get, they wanted us to concentrate on
electronics in that area. So, wow, they built this
beautiful big building, you know, right there in
the chemistry room. And we had a one 25-year lease,
and before I left, I got two 25-year lease
extensions, so that's 75 years. But, oh. When we
put that in, that was our first cylinder. And when I
left that thing, it had about a $2 million in it. So
then the next thing I went in was North Texas.
And the next cylinder was in the West Texas area
that was happening. Now all these people were
furnishing us these facilities. And let's see,
then Houston. We went into the Houston area about
the same time we went into